---
title: 'Tourist cairns and the materiality of symbolic ownership'
date: 2018-10-02
permalink: /posts/2018/10/tourist-cairns/
tags:
  - materiality
  - Scotland
  - community ownership
---

Calum Macleod just wrote a fascinating [blog
post](https://calummacleodblog.wordpress.com/2018/09/26/small-cairns-big-questions-community-empowerment-and-landscape/)
about the phenomenon of tourists building rock cairns at the 'Fairy Glen' in
northern Skye, and the actions of annoyed residents who went and disassembled
them. I don't have a huge amount to add to his thoughts -- particularly as I
try to get back into the swing of this blogging thing -- but as Dr. Macleod
highlights, the connections to the notion of __ownership__ as currently
contested in rural Scotland seem particularly relevant.

The tourists, clearly, seem aggrieved that the "mini-monuments to themselves"
were being removed, which highlights a particular way of thinking about the
spaces they visited. On the one hand, their behavior clearly demonstrated a
difference in their understanding of what was permissible in Fairy Glen versus
what would be permissible in, say, the yard of someone in an urban area.  As I
can imagine one of them opining, "the Fairy Glens belong to everyone," with an
understanding that the effort and capital they expended to get there and pose
gave them an implicit right to mark their territory.

To be honest, I do not know who holds the deed to the Fairy Glens, although
online guides refer to it as "private property." MSP and tireless land reform
advocate Andy Wightman's [Who Owns Scotland](http://whoownsscotland.org.uk/)
does not have a listing for ownership there. Scotland's law includes the
"right to roam," which allows walkers reasonable access to cross and camp on
private land so long as they take precautions to not disturbe actitivies
there.

Formal land ownership is theorized by planners and theorists as a "bundle of
rights," which often are kept together under fee simple ownership but which
can be split apart and deployed. Under this framework, Scotland's right to
roam means that some piece of ownership does confer, although there is clearly
no general "right to collect stones and stack them in little cairns." The
question beyond formal rights, then, moves into the informal rights -- who is
allowed to erect cairns, and who is allowed to remove them -- and thereby into
informal ownership. And the cairns, then, become a material mediator of that
informal relationship to the landscape. The tourists assert the right to erect
the stones and have them unperturbed indefinitely. The residents assert the
right to disassemble them and treat them as safety and environmental
nuisances.

I write this musing about rural Scotland while looking out on urban Richmond,
the mishmash of which brings to mind two things. First, I wonder how many of
the tourists horrified at the disassembly of their monuments are similarly
horrified at graffiti which tags outdoor urban spaces -- tags which are often
created by youth with little control or ownership over any degree of public
space, attempting to assert some degree of right to occupy and, at times,
defend from rival intrusion, the urban spaces they spend their days in. In the
addition, modification, and removal of tags, both by state actors and by rival
graffiti artists, both inclusion and exclusion are expressed as part of
informal ownership and control of a space.

More pointedly, though, I'm currently sitting just a few blocks south of the
eastern end of Monument Ave., Richmond's most egregious collection of
Confederate monuments. As has been painstakingly argued (to willfully deaf
ears of Confederate apologists), these monuments were explicitly erected as
actions of re-asserting white supremacy in the post-Reconstruction period. The
monuments, like the Fairy Glen cairns and graffiti tags, assert aspects of
informal ownership over the landscape, both inclusion and inclusion. Whiteness
is included, blackness is excluded, and so long as the monuments stand, they
passively but obdurately declare those rules and rights.
