---
title: 'The New York Times does Bruno Latour'
date: 2018-10-29
permalink: /posts/2018/10/latour-1/
tags:
  - Latour
  - NYT Latour
  - STS
---

So the New York Times has published a [long form
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/25/magazine/bruno-latour-post-truth-philosopher-science.html)
by [Ava Kofman](https://mobile.twitter.com/eyywa/status/1055398533489197056)
on Bruno Latour and his forthcoming book on climate change science, and, well,
all of Latour's range of stuff.

I've been tweeting far more than is healthy lately, so I was inclined to start
this post by saying "TFW you have so many thoughts to say all at once that
they get into a jam trying to get out of your head."

I'm delighted -- I get tired of saying people need to pay more attention to
STS (science and technology, and society, the field of study which Latour has
helped pioneer), and ANT (actor-network theory, the particular ontology,
epistemology, and methodlogy which Latour developed with Michel Callon) so the
fact that the Paper of Record decided to devote this many column inches to
it.

I'm annoyed -- the article is 90% really good, but in an attempt to situate
Latour's position in the "Science Wars" and so forth, lumps him together with
the postmodernists and deconstructivists. (Being annoyed at the Times is
pretty much a continuous state these days, given their utter obtuseness in
response to Trumpism, but anyway...)

I'm excited -- Latour getting a big boost in the popular press right now
would, I have to say, be really good for my career. There are many people who
know more about Latour than I do at this point, but frankly not *that* many,
and I can speak ANT and STS pretty fluently at this point. So, yay?

There's so many things to unpack in this article I'm going to do this as a
[series of blog
posts](https://michaeltbacon.github.io/tags/#community-ownership) that will
touch on different things. I'm planning on keeping this post updated (if the
Jekyll blog software will let me) with links to all of them.

I'll start here with why I think STS (with ANT a big part of that) is so
important. In later blog posts I'll get more into why the New York Times
article's mistakes, while understandable and certainly not original, are
really bad for understanding the position Latour occupies. I'll also hopefully
spend some time on unpacking how Latour seems to set off such strong reactions
in people, and getting into why that is.

## Latour, STS, and why we need to get used to the idea that science is social

Science is socially constructed. Facts are produced by social endeavors. This
should be considered established, uncontroversial scientific fact at this point.

In saying this, I am being completely un-ironic while at the same time
realizing how much this will seem self-contradictory to many on first read,
and that needs a lot of unpacking. Which, it turns out, is kind of the point
of STS in the first place.

The Times article nicely goes into Latour's experiences in Cote d'Ivoire and
how, effectively, this trained his ethnographer's eye. In his most widely read
book to date, _We Have Never Been Modern_, Latour gives a brief recounting of
how he saw his early career at that point. He'd learned ethnography in West
Africa, then went to the Salk Institute and did ethnography on the scientists
there. As the Times article recounts it,

> When he presented his early findings at the first meeting of the newly
> established Society for Social Studies of Science, in 1976, many of his
> colleagues were taken aback by a series of black‐ and‐white photographic
> slides depicting scientists on the job, as though they were chimpanzees. It
> was felt that scientists were the only ones who could speak with authority
> on behalf of science; there was something blasphemous about subjecting the
> discipline, supposedly the apex of modern society, to the kind of cold
> scrutiny that anthropologists traditionally reserved for “premodern”
> peoples.

This particular tension will become not just a permanent feature of reactions
to Latour's work, but as fertile for digging into just what's going on in how
we understand science. The "blasphemy" that Latour is committing here is
taking the methods of ethnography, which were developed through the 19th and
20th century with all the trappings of scientific objectivity and observation,
and turning them on the scientists themselves.

(As a quick aside, while Latour is now discussed as a philosopher, it should
be noted that the main title he's claimed for himself for most of his career
is that of an ethnographer. He considers himself a social scientist first, and
ethnography is is method. While his work directly addresses some central
questions of philosophy and has been addressed as such (unfortunately, in my
opinion, largely by Graham Harmon, who I think gets a lot wrong), Latour
should be considered at least somewhat apart in that his work has always been
inherently empirical in a way that most philosophy I encounter is not.)

Kofman gets this bit exactly right, in my view. The primary critique of
_Laboratory Life_ was not that it was wrong or poorly done, but that it
showed the sausage factory involved in the production of science.

> Day‐to‐day research — what he termed science in the making — appeared not so
> much as a stepwise progression toward rational truth as a disorderly mass of
> stray observations, inconclusive results and fledgling explanations. Far
> from simply discovering facts, scientists seemed to be, as Latour and
> Woolgar wrote in “Laboratory Life,” “in the business of being convinced and
> convincing others.” During the process of arguing over uncertain data,
> scientists foregrounded the reality that they were, in some essential sense,
> always speaking for the facts; and yet, as soon as their propositions were
> turned into indisputable statements and peer‐ reviewed papers — what Latour
> called ready‐made science — they claimed that such facts had always spoken
> for themselves. That is, only once the scientific community accepted
> something as true were the all‐too‐human processes behind it effectively
> erased or, as Latour put it, black‐ boxed.

Further, the "unmasking" came not at some fringe facility or in some
discipline that could be dismissed by "real scientists" as pseudo-science. It
came at the unimpeachably regarded Salk Institute, studying microbiologists. 

## So, about the fact of the social construction of sciences...

I said at the beginning of the last section that the social construction of
the sciences is an empirical fact. I say this with confidence as someone who
has seen the insides of a number of different science labs and field stations,
where absolutely outstanding science got done. 

But more to the point, when people object to the assertion of science being a
social construct, they do so not from any standpoint of empiricism. It's an
appeal to the need for the authority of science. (Which, while perhaps
understandable in a time when scientific authority can seem like the only way
to stop catastrophic climate change, is misguided.) The social construction of
science is easily discoverable by any review of not just any extant scientific
lab, but also the intellectual history of now-discredited scientific "facts"
like scientific racism and the existence of "great races." No, the mistake
that at least good-faith opponents of social constructivism accuse STS of
making is of breaking the fairy tale of neutral, scientific objectivity,
believing that it's the only thing that holds up scientific authority.

I'll get into the problems with the NYT article in the next post, but for this
one, I'll simply note that the claim that Latour was ever a "post-truth"
philosopher who called for the "deconstruction" of the sciences is a very poor
understanding of the intellectual history behind STS and the "Science Wars."
For now, importantly, Latour has never seen himself as an enemy of scientific
authority or of science as our best representation of objective
reality. Rather, he's been cognizant of being honest about how we build that,
and defending how science _actually_ happens rather than pretending it happens
some other way.

In conversations last year about this with some other scientists, several of
them raised the same concern that the Times article addresses, and which
Latour most directly addressed in his 2004 paper, "Why Has Critique Run Out of
Steam?" That is to say, by raising these concerns, even if Latour doesn't mean
to, will these critiques end up being used by science's true enemies like the
fossil fuel-funded climate change denialists?

My objection at the time was that Latour didn't originate these critiques, and
that while it's a bit of a gross oversimiplifcation of their views on science,
philosophers like Nietzsche and Lyotard are far closer to saying something
like, "science has no basis in objective fact, it's just socially invented"
than Latour. (They're not quite saying that either, but they're a lot closer
to doing so.) 

But really the objection I should have gone with was to point to quacks like
Jordan Peterson, who has repeatedly both mocked STS and any questioning of
science as the arbiter of fact while at the same time putting in work on
climate change denial. The "infamous" East Anglia emails, which to anyone with
a passing familiarity in how science works, showed some ordinary scientists
hard at work doing good science. However, the "fairy tale," as I've called it,
of pure scientific objectivity and dispassionate method, was hauled out to
beat the climate scientists about the head. In the end, no social
constructivism was needed deal a crippling blow to climate consensus at a
critical time; the damage was instead done by the unreasonable standard of
scientific objectivity!

Charlatans like Peterson claim to be the true holders of scientific
objectivity (with no empirical grounding for that claim, it must be said), and
because we have allowed this fairy tale to persist, they then hold up the
unreasonable standard and accuse real, true science of falling short of that
standard.

## If science is social, how does it depict reality? 

I'll get into this more in other posts, hopefully, but for now I'll give the
two-minute tour through Latour's theory of science (and technology, but we can
get to that later).

The essence of Latour's philosophical program, articulated most directly in
_We Have Never Been Modern_, is effectively that _modernism_ has been built
around a "constitution" which sets itself up as setting human concerns to one
side for study and natural concerns to another. Humanism and the social
sciences deal with humans, natural and physical sciences deal with the other,
and their methods and concerns are entirely separate. (A note here:
"modernism" has a more specific meaning in French discourses in which Latour
was trained, but it's not far off to think of it as "Western rationalist
thought" here, although as I'll get into later, it gets bigger than that too.)

This, for Latour is where the problems begin. We have trouble thinking about
where scientific facts might exist if they don't either exist as "outside" or
"inside" human thought. Are they "outside," objective and immutable and just
waiting to be "discovered," or on the other hand, "inside," and just invented,
as Alan Sokal mistakenly thought Latour and others were arguing?

Latour says, effectively, neither and both. The modernist process, in his
theory, is to _publicly_ "purify" onto one side the human, social,
constructed, mind-dependent, conceptual, transcendent, and thought-based and
onto the other the natural, physical, concrete, reality-based, and
immanent. But, he argues, while this public process of purification is going
on, behind the curtain there's the constant "hybridization" of the human and
the natural to produce new things. The hybridization is critical -- modernity
can't be without it -- but it must never be acknowledged. Hence the "black
boxing" of the Salk Institute's labs and the process for normalizing two
series of average global temperatures to each other.

The notion of facts being produced rather than independent is actually quite
old, and in fact hiding in the word itself. "Fact" shares the same
etymological roots as "factor" and "manufacture." In French, Latour uses the
punny phrase, _les faits sont faits_, (the facts are made) which while not
quite as pithy in English, plays on the same common etymology. The notion of
fact as a thing which is beyond dispute emerges not from science, but rather
from the adversarial judicial system, in which a fact in court is an assertion
which is no longer in dispute by either side or by the judge. That fact has to
be _established_ first by the oppositional process -- it must be called into
being with judges, a courthouse, evidence, and dispute.

To move back into science, what Latour argues is not that with enough arguing
gravity can be made to accelerate objects at something markedly different than
9.8 m/s<sup>2</sup>. Rather, that fact was brought into existence by the work
of physicists and mathematicians _working together with actual objects and the
planet itself_. So the fact is _social_, but Latour insists on re-defining
"social" to include the planet and the scientists and their letters to each
other and so on and so forth. (His most extensive work in this vein is _The
Pasteurization of France_, which I won't get into too much here.)

So the fact isn't only in the human realm. It isn't only in the natural
realm. It exists as an entity, supported by a network of actors, both human
and non-human (hence name "actor-network theory) who get a say in what the
fact in the end looks like.

And more to the urgent point at hand, in the absence of these networks, the
fact can disappear.

## Next...

I think that's enough for one way-too-long post. I'll get into my beefs with
the New York Times article (again, it's mostly very good), specifically why
applying the "post-truth" and "deconstructionism" labels to Latour is such a
mistake. We'll see where we go from there.
