---
title: The Social Production of "Local Knowledge"
date: 2019-09-13
permalink: /posts/2019/09/local-knowledge
tags:
  - STS
  - Scotland
  - community ownership
---

A couple months ago I tweeted about a dissertation epiphany that I'd had after
a rare full night's sleep.

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">The social
construction of local knowledge! Yes! That closes the gap!<br><br>&lt;sorry,
minor dissertation-related epiphany this morning&gt;</p>&mdash; Michael
T. Bacon (@MichaelTBacon) <a
href="https://twitter.com/MichaelTBacon/status/1154359087485935617?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July
25, 2019</a></blockquote> <script async
src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

After which the one member of my committee who follows me on Twitter bugged me
for details. Okay, fair enough, it's probably not the worst idea in the world
to get me to actually generate some text about it. This got long enough to do
in parts, so here's part 1, which is mostly about the things which *don't*
answer the question. The epiphany stuff comes in the next few parts.

## The Setup: What makes community land buyouts work?

The premise of the practical applicability of my dissertation comes down to
something like this: The Scottish community land ownership movement, driven by
community buyouts and boosted by the community right-to-buy and the Scottish
Land Fund, has produced results that would generally be enviable in many
communities that are suffering economic stagnation, environmental
degradation. I take this as given based on previous work, a position not
accepted particularly among enthusiasts for neoliberal economics, but well
supported by the still-emerging research in the area.

What I find particularly notable is that despite having many runaway
successes, a sizable number of partial successes, and a vanishingly small
number of outright failures, I generally failed in my initial attempts to find
commonality in strategy, language, approach, or underlying trick for why these
buyouts worked that was generally applicable across trusts rather than unique
to each.

So the question stands: what makes the community buyout movement so
successful?

## First guesses

### Is it clean energy projects?

Broadly speaking, many of the more successful trusts had engaged in clean
energy projects, tapping into Scotland's hefty reserves of rain and wind to
generate power for clean energy-hungry policy frameworks. When successful, the
energy systems they've launched have created revenue streams that allow the
trusts to engage in other business. And yet, even this doesn't explain
successes. Some trusts, like the Pairc Trust, had launched their buyout effort
in direct response to wind farm proposals that local residents felt created
inequitable distributions of community benefit.

### Is it artificial success generated by government largesse?

Critics of the community land ownership movement point to payouts from the
lottery-funded Scottish Land Fund, Highlands and Islands Enterprise, and other
state-funded actors, and claim that any economic successes are simply the
product of dumping money into an area, and that these results could have been
achieved without community land ownership.

Leaders in Community Land Scotland have shot back at this accusation, first
with the running total comparing the total sum of the Land Fund spent on
acquisition of community land since the founding of the fund (currently
hovering in the £60 million mark) with how many kilometers of the new
Edinburgh Tramway that this sum would have paid for (currently less than
two). Beyond the jocular comparison to urban projects, community land leaders
also note that the amount spent on community land is dwarfed by agricultural
subsidies, mining subsidies, and losses to tax haven behavior. 

Further, and more to the point, almost none of the Land Fund money stays
within the local community. Most land that went into community ownership was
formerly held by absentee owners. Largely, those owners have received their
purchase money and left their former landholdings for good.

Finally, it's worth noting that many private landowners have treated their
rural holdings as minor charities, taking sometimes large net losses on the
operation of their estates -- losses that often failed to change the tales of
economic stagnation, out-migration, and general community decline.

### Can commons theory answer this question?

Theorizations of the commons re-emerged in the last decade of the 20th
century, specifically but not limited to Elinor Ostrom's classic _Governing
the Commons_. Ostrom, along with others such as Daniel Bromley and Ronald
Oakerson, persuasively demonstrated that commons regimes are not doomed to be
"tragic," as Garrett Hardin had famously claimed in 1968. Their work,
particularly during an intensive period in the 1990s, provided an analytical
framework for understanding, predicting, and designing commons regimes for
success. In the years that have followed, interest in the commons as a
framework for all sorts of matters has flourished, often with quite disparate
interpretations of what commons are.

However, much of commons literature has focused on the possibility for
successes and the frameworks which must be in place, along with the
capacity for greater equity. Far less available, however, are explanations of
why a transition to common property management would generate such a broad
range of positive outcomes and a re-emergence of economic vitality and
transitions to better environmental stewardship.

Further, in my field research, common property regimes were often not
strangers to these areas. Nearly every crofting community in the highlands
retains a large designated common grazings area which is managed by the local
crofting commission. While changes in the nature of crofting and pressures
from neoliberal governments have ham-strung the work of crofting commissions,
the transition to community land ownership has only changed the nature of the
local common property regime and in many ways made it less like the classic
cases that Ostrom analyzes.

In my analysis, commons theory has a large and central role to play in
explaining community land ownership successes at a theoretical level, but it
is not sufficient to explain an almost sudden and multi-faceted burst of
community vitality.
